# Books I've read in 2019

Around twelve months ago I have decided to set a personal objective of reading at least 20 books in 2019. This has worked out, although few of them were comic books. It is a form of passing the ideas which is surprisingly new to me. I have never been into Marvel or DC comics, let alone any more serious positions. Living in France exposed me to the long-standing tradition of the francophone countries. Many top notch comic books (or BD, as they call it here) creators coming from France or Belgium made me want to discover those unknown waters. And what a pleasure it was to see that one of my favorite position of 2019 is a comic book. Well, enough talking, here's my list presented in a chronological order.

I will follow Goodreads notation guidelines- the maximum score a book can get is five stars, the really bad ones would get just one.

1. **Heart of Darkness** by Joseph Conrad (* * * *)

    Ultimate joy to finally discover a piece which was so broadly discussed in many art forms across the decades since it's publication. We follow the expedition group which goal is to find a successful agent who's job was to ensure the supply of ivory to colonialists. A dark story of a self-called emperor ruling over a distant piece of land in a far-away colony. Based on a personal experience of the author, the book has left a huge mark of anxiety over me. Being a great metaphor of going deep into humans' psyche, the story of Marlow and Kurtz is a universal warning and sad realization of European's condition and morality.

2. **The Pragmatic Programmer: From Journeyman to Master** by Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas (* * * *)

    Considered a bible of all programmers, developers and hackers. This book is a steady guideline showing you how to handle your codebase in a classy, organized, decoupled and understandable way. Many good practices that you would read on the forums like HN or Reddit would come from that publication. It is absolutely timeless piece of text that I (along with thousands of others) advice to both junior and senior devs. Something tells me it would be a nice practice to read it again every few years and compare my experience with the advices from the book.

3. **Chrzest Ognia** by Andrzej Sapkowski (* * * *)

    Third book in the Witcher series provides, as always, an absorbing story that makes you follow the adventures of Geralt and his companions. Pleasant read that would make you want to continue the lecture of the Saga.

4. **Factfulness: Ten Reasons We're Wrong About the World** by Hans Rosling, Ola Rosling and Anna Rosling Rönnlund (* * * * *)

    I have followed Bill Gates' recommendations and this time, actually as always, I was not disappointed. This is one of the books that will flip your understanding of the surrounding world. Rossling takes a set of openly available data and explains the correlations between them and current condition of humanity in different continents and countries. The thing that is so ridiculously shocking is the very fact that everyone HAS access to the data and yet very few can make sense out of the numbers. Beautiful piece, especially for the Westerners closed down in their fine glass houses.

5. **Lord of the flies** by William Golding (* * * *)

    A book that was proudly occupying my to-read list since at least a decade. One of those situations where your general reception of a book depends highly on your age and current personal situation. Great metaphore of deep political and sociological roots of our civilisation. Golding predicted Stanford Prison experiment twelve years before it took place.

6. **Call of the wild** by Jack London (* * * * *)

    Visiting wild American North after fifteen years could not be more pleasant. The story of Buck never gets old and Jack London is an author that is capable of manipulating your emotions by painting a vivid images of the wild sceneries like no one else. Got to read it more often.
